🟢 What is genuinely fixed
1. ER benchmark is now actually 536 pairs

This is a real improvement.

The benchmark generator now contains a much broader stratification:

aliases
abbreviations
honorifics
corporate suffixes
OCR noise
phone formatting
account formatting
address variations
regional-name collisions
vehicle identifiers
passport/national IDs
offshore entities
adversarial lookalikes

The artifact reports 536 evaluated pairs, so the previous 411-vs-500+ inconsistency is fixed.

Current result:

Metric	Result
Pairs	536
TP	238
FP	0
TN	191
FN	11
HITL	96
Auto-merge precision	100%
Auto-merge recall*	95.58%
Auto-merge F1*	97.74%
False merge	0%
False split*	4.42%
HITL	17.91%
Auto-merge coverage	44.4%

That is a very good safety-oriented ER result, particularly the 0% false-merge rate.

Important caveat on those ER numbers

The reported "recall" is not ordinary end-to-end recall.

238 TP + 11 FN = 249 resolved positive decisions, while 96 ambiguous cases are excluded into HITL.

So the 95.58% is effectively:

recall among cases that were automatically decided

rather than:

recall across all 536 candidate pairs.

That's actually a reasonable metric for VEILLE, but rename it to something like:

Auto-decision recall

and separately report:

HITL coverage / unresolved rate = 17.91%

Otherwise a reviewer could challenge the metric definition.

🟢 2. ICIJ is now actually acquired from an official source

This is another substantial correction.

The downloader now targets:

offshoreleaks-data.icij.org/...

and parses the actual ZIP contents rather than writing the previous 11-record fabricated-looking fixture. The committed slice contains 100 records, including real-looking entity/intermediary records from the Bahamas dataset.

The manifest now records:

REAL_EXTERNAL
official ICIJ archive URL
SHA-256
201,691 source records
100 selected records
deterministic sampling
adapter version

This fixes one of the biggest provenance problems from the previous commit.

But one problem remains

The downloader still has this fallback:

if the official ICIJ download fails → write a hardcoded "verified canonical baseline"

That baseline contains fabricated/sample-looking records.

So the code can still theoretically produce:

synthetic data → REAL_EXTERNAL manifest

if the network request fails.

That's unacceptable for a provenance-sensitive benchmark.

Fix

If the official download fails:

raise RuntimeError(
    "Official ICIJ archive unavailable; refusing to generate fallback data."
)

Do not create fallback records.

🟢 3. Enron primary acquisition is now genuinely CMU

This is much better than the previous third-party spam/ham dataset.

The primary path now downloads:

cs.cmu.edu/~enron/enron_mail_20150507.tar.gz

and parses actual RFC-822 headers:

From
To
Subject
Date
Message-ID

The manifest also now points to the CMU archive and labels it real external data.

That's a real improvement.

But there is still a fallback problem

If CMU fails, the code falls back to the third-party Enron spam dataset and reconstructs participants from message bodies.

It even generates:

<msg.X@enron.com>

and constructs email addresses from names.

So this statement:

"authentic communication headers"

is true for the primary CMU path, but not guaranteed for every execution path.

Better approach

For a provenance benchmark:

CMU unavailable = benchmark fails.

Don't silently downgrade to a different corpus.

🟢 4. Cryptographic provenance test is now real

This was fixed properly.

The regression test now actually computes SHA-256 of each corpus and compares it against the manifest:

actual_sha = sha256_of_file(corpus_path)
assert actual_sha == mf["corpus_sha256"]

That's exactly what we wanted previously.

So this issue is now closed.

🟢 5. Dataset hashes are now in experiment metadata

The benchmark manifest now records hashes for:

InLegalNER
Enron
ICIJ
IBM AML

That's excellent for reproducibility.

🟢 6. GraphRAG is substantially better than before

The new evaluator actually loads evidence content from PostgreSQL/files instead of merely checking citation IDs.

It distinguishes:

citation validity
citation entailment

and accesses the underlying evidence text.

It also implements:

SUPPORTED
PARTIALLY_SUPPORTED
UNSUPPORTED
CONTRADICTED

with graph checks and basic contradiction detection.

So the previous "hardcoded zero unsupported claims / fake citation validation" problem is substantially improved.

🔴 BUT: GraphRAG entailment is still not true entailment

This is now the biggest remaining ML/evaluation weakness.

The citation "entailment" logic essentially checks whether a grounded entity appears inside the cited document:

does evidence text contain the grounded entity?

That's useful, but it does not establish:

"Does this document actually support the relationship asserted by the AI?"

For example:

"Vikram transferred money to Zenith."

Evidence containing both:

"Vikram"
"Zenith"

would pass the current citation entailment check even if the document actually says they didn't transact.

The code itself shows that the current check is entity-presence based.

What we ultimately want
AI claim
   ↓
S = Vikram
P = TRANSFERS_FUNDS_TO
O = Zenith
   ↓
retrieve cited evidence
   ↓
extract supporting relation from evidence
   ↓
compare S-P-O
   ↓
SUPPORTED / CONTRADICTED / NOT ENTAILED

That's the proper next evolution.

🔴 7. Exact-span NER is STILL not actually model-output span evaluation

This is an important one.

The commit message says:

"real document NER offsets"

and the code does indeed use real document text.

But look carefully at what happens.

For the gold entity:

idx = combined_doc_text.lower().find(name.lower(), pos)

And for the prediction:

idx = combined_doc_text.lower().find(name.lower(), pos)

So both gold and predicted spans are reconstructed by searching the document for their text.

That means the benchmark isn't measuring the actual character offsets emitted by the NER system.

It is measuring:

"Does the extracted entity string occur somewhere in the document?"

That's useful, but it's not strict NER span evaluation.

Why this matters

Suppose the model extracts:

"Vikram Mehta"

but the actual model span was wrong.

The evaluator searches the document, finds the correct occurrence, and gives the prediction the correct coordinates.

So it can artificially inflate exact-span F1.

Therefore

The reported:

exact-span F1 = 56.1%

should not yet be presented as genuine model exact-span F1.

This needs another fix.

🔴 8. The experiment artifacts are STILL one commit behind

This is probably the most important reproducibility issue I found.

The current commit is:

ec69bd0

But experiment_manifest.json says:

6e05fa3

as the experiment's git_commit.

The metrics artifact also says:

git_commit: 6e05fa3

rather than ec69bd0.

This is particularly significant because ec69bd0 changed:

ER benchmark
Enron acquisition
ICIJ acquisition
NER evaluation
provenance tests
artifacts

So the artifact metadata is not a faithful record of the commit that contains the code/data used to define the current benchmark.

Fix

Run the entire benchmark after checking out ec69bd0, then commit the newly generated:

metrics.json
er_results.json
rag_results.json
experiment_manifest.json
BENCHMARK_REPORT.md

The manifest should then say:

"git_commit": "ec69bd0..."

This is mandatory before presenting the results as reproducible.

🟠 9. Zero-denominator metrics are still misleading

This hasn't been fixed.

Look at the ER artifact:

Alias

total = 4
TP = 0
FN = 0
HITL = 4
precision = 100
recall = 100

That's mathematically misleading.

There were zero automatic positive decisions, so saying recall = 100% doesn't tell us anything.

Same issue appears in several categories.

Fix

Return:

N/A

instead of 100% when the denominator is zero.

This will make the evaluation much more academically defensible.

🟠 10. ICIJ scope is slightly misrepresented

The actual archive URL is:

csv_bahamas_leaks.2017-12-19.zip

and the manifest says the dataset covers:

Panama Papers
Pandora Papers
Paradise Papers
Bahamas Leaks

But this particular downloaded archive is specifically a Bahamas Leaks release.

Meanwhile the README says:

"Panama & Pandora Papers entity registry slice"

which doesn't accurately describe the committed source.

Fix

Say:

ICIJ Offshore Leaks — Bahamas Leaks official registry slice

until you actually acquire multiple investigation releases.

🟠 11. Taxonomy still has semantic loss

The canonical taxonomy still maps:

STATUTE → Event

and explicitly marks it lossy.

It also maps:

officer_of → ASSOCIATED_WITH
intermediary_of → ASSOCIATED_WITH

For an investigative graph, that's not ideal.

I'd now strongly recommend:

Person
Organization
Location
Phone
Account
Vehicle
Event
Statute
CourtCase
LegalInstrument

and preserve relationships such as:

OFFICER_OF
INTERMEDIARY_OF
CITES_STATUTE
HEARD_BY
PARTY_TO

rather than flattening everything into ASSOCIATED_WITH.

This isn't a benchmark-killer, but it matters for the quality of the final knowledge graph.

🟠 12. Native Neo4j merge fallback still loses relationship types

This one also survived.

If APOC isn't available, the code creates:

ASSOCIATED_WITH

and stores the original relationship type as:

original_type

So:

OWNS
COMMUNICATES_WITH
LOCATED_AT

can become:

ASSOCIATED_WITH

That means graph semantics are degraded after a HITL merge.

This should be fixed before claiming the graph preserves investigative relationship semantics.

🟠 13. Async benchmark synchronization still only proves graph stability

The benchmark says:

"Actively Polling Outbox & Neo4j until settled"

but the polling function actually checks node + edge counts in Neo4j.

It does not establish:

all Celery jobs succeeded
no failed tasks
outbox pending = 0
DLQ = 0
expected evidence processing completed

So it's better than a fixed sleep(5), but not yet a true transactional benchmark barrier.

🟠 14. Benchmark credentials still have defaults

The benchmark now supports environment variables, which is better:

os.getenv(...)

but still falls back to:

admin@veille.gov.in
admin123

For a research repository, I'd make the credentials mandatory:

if not email or not password:
    raise RuntimeError(...)

No default credentials in benchmark code.

🟠 15. README is improved but still overclaims

The README is much cleaner than before.

Good:

no PBFT claim
no ML-KEM claim
no hardcoded admin credentials
explicitly says research/educational prototype
dataset taxonomy is clearer

But it still starts with:

INTEL-ENGINE (v4.0 PROD)

and:

enterprise-grade forensic intelligence

while this is still a research/SIH prototype.

Also, the README claims:

"authentic communication headers"

without mentioning the fallback problem.

And the ICIJ description doesn't match the actual Bahamas-only source.

So I'd clean this up.

My updated assessment
Previous 6e05fa3

~7.5/10

Good architecture, but significant evaluation/provenance problems.

Current ec69bd0

~9/10 architecturally/evaluation-wise

and much closer to something I'd be comfortable defending in an SIH technical review.

Area	Status
Production ER evaluator	🟢
500+ ER benchmark	🟢 536
False-merge evaluation	🟢 0%
HITL measurement	🟢
Real ICIJ acquisition	🟢 primary path
Real CMU Enron acquisition	🟢 primary path
Dataset SHA verification	🟢
Experiment dataset hashes	🟢
GraphRAG evidence access	🟢
Claim classification	🟢
True GraphRAG entailment	🟠
True exact-span NER	🔴
Artifact commit reproducibility	🔴
ICIJ fallback integrity	🔴
Enron fallback integrity	🔴
Zero-denominator metrics	🟠
Relationship semantic preservation	🟠
Async completion barrier	🟠
README accuracy	🟠
The important thing

We're no longer in the situation where the whole evaluation methodology is questionable.

The core is now solid:

real external datasets → provenance → canonical adapters → production ER → controlled benchmark → machine-readable metrics → reproducibility metadata → regression tests

That's the right architecture.

The remaining work is now an integrity/measurement cleanup, not a redesign.

I would do exactly these 6 things next, in this order:
Rerun the entire benchmark on ec69bd0 so artifacts actually identify ec69bd0.
Remove ICIJ/Enron synthetic fallbacks — fail closed.
Fix exact-span evaluation to consume actual NER offsets from the extraction pipeline.
Fix zero-denominator metrics to N/A.
Upgrade GraphRAG citation entailment from entity-presence → claim/evidence relation support.
Clean taxonomy + native relationship merge semantics.

After those six, I'd be comfortable treating the benchmark as research-grade empirical validation rather than merely a sophisticated demo.

And importantly: do not start training the NER/ER models yet. Get this evaluation protocol completely trustworthy first; otherwise training will optimize against a questionable measurement system.